Andarist/typegen types (#2674)
statelyai/xstate: .changeset/red-ants-lick.md

---
'xstate': minor
---

author: @Andarist
author: @mattpocock

Added the ability to tighten TS declarations of machine with generated metadata. This opens several exciting doors to being able to use typegen seamlessly with XState to provide an amazing typing experience.

> With the [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mattpocock.xstate-vscode), you can specify a new attribute called `tsTypes: true` in your machine definition:

Author: the URL here will require to be updated, right? I've seen that you were setting up Stately publisher with David

Reviewer: Yep, we can adjust later

Author: Sure, just remember about updating that before releasing the new version of XState - people subscribe to our releases and it would be preferable if the final URL would end up in the emails sent out to them.

> With the [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=statelyai.stately-vscode), you can specify a new attribute called `tsTypes: true` in your machine definition:

Author: ```suggestion
With the [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=statelyai.stately-vscode), you can specify a new attribute called `tsTypes: {}` in your machine definition:
```

```ts
const machine = createMachine({

>   tsTypes: true,

Author: ```suggestion
  tsTypes: {},
```

})
```

> The extension will automatically add a type assertion to this property, which allows for type-safe access to a lot of XState's API's.

Author: ```suggestion
The extension will automatically add a type assertion to this property, which allows for type-safe access to a lot of XState's API's.

⚠️ This feature is in beta. Actions/services/guards/delays might currently get incorrectly annotated if they are called "in response" to always transitions or raised events. We are working on fixing this, both in XState and in the typegen.
```

> The extension will automatically add some extra generics to `createMachine`, which allow for type-safe access to nearly all of XState's API's.

Author: ```suggestion
The extension will automatically add a type assertion to this property, which allows for type-safe access to a lot of XState's API's.
```

---
"xstate": minor
"@xstate/react": minor
---

Added the ability to tighten TS declarations of machine with generated metadata. This opens several exciting doors to being able to use typegen seamlessly with XState to provide an amazing typing experience.

> The basics work like this:

Author: This is IMHO too technical and also describes a lot of implementation details that people shouldn't focus on, nor they should try to declare `Meta` type on their own.

Reviewer: How would you word it?

Author: I would only mention how you can use this, that it's a beta feature, give a short example - but I would omit the `interface Meta` declaration from here

```ts
const model = createModel({}, {
  events: {
    FOO: () => ({}),
    BAR: () => ({}),
  }
});

interface Meta {

>   __generated: 1;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  '@@xstate/typegen': true;
```
